source/tutorials/continuous-integration-github-actions.rst, before:

Continuous Integration with GitHub Actions
==========================================

This tutorial guides you through **a few short steps** to start using 
`GitHub Actions <https://github.com/features/actions>`_ as your CI
for commits and pull requests.


Caching builds using Cachix
---------------------------

One nice benefit of Nix is that **CI can build and cache developer environments 
for every project** on every branch using binary caches.

Another important aspect of CI is the feedback loop of 
**how many minutes does the build take to finish**.

Using `Cachix <https://cachix.org/>`_ you'll never
have to waste building any derivation twice and you'll share built derivations with all your developers.

After each job, just built derivations are pushed to your binary cache.

Before each job, derivations to be built are first substituted (if they exist) from your binary cache.


1. Creating your first binary cache
***********************************

It's recommended to have different binary caches per team, depending who will have write/read access to it.

Fill out the form on `create binary cache <https://app.cachix.org/cache>`_ page. 

On your freshly created binary cache, generate signing keypair via **Push binaries tab** instructions.


2. Setting up secrets
*********************

On your GitHub repository or organization (for use across all repositories):

1. Click on ``Settings`` 
2. Click on ``Secrets``.
3. Add your (previously generated) signing key under name ``CACHIX_SIGNING_KEY``.


Setting up GitHub Actions
-------------------------

Create ``.github/workflows/test.yml`` with:

.. code:: yaml

    name: "Test"
    on:
      pull_request:
      push:
    jobs:
      tests:
        runs-on: ubuntu-latest
        steps:
        - uses: actions/checkout@v2.3.4
        - uses: cachix/install-nix-action@v12
          with:
            nix_path: nixpkgs=channel:nixos-unstable
        - uses: cachix/cachix-action@v7
          with:
            name: mycache
            signingKey: '${{ secrets.CACHIX_SIGNING_KEY }}'
            # Only needed for private caches
            #authToken: '${{ secrets.CACHIX_AUTH_TOKEN }}'
        - run: nix-build
        - run: nix-shell --run "echo OK"

Once you commit and push to your GitHub repository,
you should see status checks appearing on commits and PRs.


Going forward
-------------

- See `GitHub Actions workflow syntax <https://docs.github.com/en/actions/reference/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions>`_

- To quickly setup a Nix project read through 
  `Getting started Nix template <https://github.com/nix-dot-dev/getting-started-nix-template>`_.

Commit message:

github actions: follow up with cachix API write tokens

source/tutorials/continuous-integration-github-actions.rst, after:

Continuous Integration with GitHub Actions
==========================================

This tutorial guides you through **a few short steps** to start using 
`GitHub Actions <https://github.com/features/actions>`_ as your CI
for commits and pull requests.


Caching builds using Cachix
---------------------------

One nice benefit of Nix is that **CI can build and cache developer environments 
for every project** on every branch using binary caches.

Another important aspect of CI is the feedback loop of 
**how many minutes does the build take to finish**.

Using `Cachix <https://cachix.org/>`_ you'll never
have to waste building any derivation twice and you'll share built derivations with all your developers.

After each job, just built derivations are pushed to your binary cache.

Before each job, derivations to be built are first substituted (if they exist) from your binary cache.


1. Creating your first binary cache
***********************************

It's recommended to have different binary caches per team, depending who will have write/read access to it.

Fill out the form on `create binary cache <https://app.cachix.org/cache>`_ page. 

On your freshly created binary cache, follow **Push binaries** tab instructions.


2. Setting up secrets
*********************

On your GitHub repository or organization (for use across all repositories):

1. Click on ``Settings`` 
2. Click on ``Secrets``.
3. Add your previously generated secrets (``CACHIX_SIGNING_KEY`` and/or ``CACHIX_AUTH_TOKEN``).


Setting up GitHub Actions
-------------------------

Create ``.github/workflows/test.yml`` with:

.. code:: yaml

    name: "Test"
    on:
      pull_request:
      push:
    jobs:
      tests:
        runs-on: ubuntu-latest
        steps:
        - uses: actions/checkout@v2.3.4
        - uses: cachix/install-nix-action@v12
          with:
            nix_path: nixpkgs=channel:nixos-unstable
        - uses: cachix/cachix-action@v8
          with:
            name: mycache
            # If you chose signing key for write access
            signingKey: '${{ secrets.CACHIX_SIGNING_KEY }}'
            # If you chose API tokens for write access OR if you have a private cache
            authToken: '${{ secrets.CACHIX_AUTH_TOKEN }}'
        - run: nix-build
        - run: nix-shell --run "echo OK"

Once you commit and push to your GitHub repository,
you should see status checks appearing on commits and PRs.


Going forward
-------------

- See `GitHub Actions workflow syntax <https://docs.github.com/en/actions/reference/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions>`_

- To quickly setup a Nix project read through 
  `Getting started Nix template <https://github.com/nix-dot-dev/getting-started-nix-template>`_.
