source/tutorials/install-nix.rst, before:

.. _install-nix:

Install Nix
===========

Linux
-----

Install Nix on via the recommended `multi-user installation <https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/#chap-installation>`_:

.. code:: bash

   sh <(curl -L https://nixos.org/nix/install) --daemon

.. note::

  For security you may want to `verify the installation script`_ using GPG signatures.


macOS
-----

Install Nix on via the recommended `multi-user installation <https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/#chap-installation>`_:

.. code:: bash

   sh <(curl -L https://nixos.org/nix/install) --darwin-use-unencrypted-nix-store-volume --daemon


.. note::

   For security you may want to `verify the installation script`_ using GPG signatures.


Windows (WSL2)
--------------

Install Nix on via the recommended `single-user installation <https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/#chap-installation>`_:

.. code:: bash

  sh <(curl -L https://nixos.org/nix/install) --no-daemon

.. note::

   For security you may want to `verify the installation script`_ using GPG signatures.


Docker
------

Start a Docker shell with Nix:

.. code:: bash

      $ docker run -it nixos/nix

Or start a Docker shell with Nix exposing a ``workdir`` directory:

.. code:: bash

      $ mkdir workdir
      $ docker run -it -v $(pwd)/workdir:/workdir nixos/nix
   
Verify installation
-------------------

Check that the installation by opening **a new terminal** and typing:


.. code:: bash

   $ nix-env --version
   nix-env (Nix) 2.3.15

.. _verify the installation script: https://nixos.org/download.html#nix-verify-installation

Commit message:

add short hacking tutorial for nixpkgs with docker
This example is intentionally a bit more verbose as docker might be used
by upstream authors to test package in nixpkgs without having to install
nix.

source/tutorials/install-nix.rst, after:

.. _install-nix:

Install Nix
===========

Linux
-----

Install Nix on via the recommended `multi-user installation <https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/#chap-installation>`_:

.. code:: bash

   sh <(curl -L https://nixos.org/nix/install) --daemon

.. note::

  For security you may want to `verify the installation script`_ using GPG signatures.


macOS
-----

Install Nix on via the recommended `multi-user installation <https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/#chap-installation>`_:

.. code:: bash

   sh <(curl -L https://nixos.org/nix/install) --darwin-use-unencrypted-nix-store-volume --daemon


.. note::

   For security you may want to `verify the installation script`_ using GPG signatures.


Windows (WSL2)
--------------

Install Nix on via the recommended `single-user installation <https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/#chap-installation>`_:

.. code:: bash

  sh <(curl -L https://nixos.org/nix/install) --no-daemon

.. note::

   For security you may want to `verify the installation script`_ using GPG signatures.


Docker
------

Start a Docker shell with Nix:

.. code:: bash

      $ docker run -it nixos/nix

Or start a Docker shell with Nix exposing a ``workdir`` directory:

.. code:: bash

      $ mkdir workdir
      $ docker run -it -v $(pwd)/workdir:/workdir nixos/nix

The ``workdir`` example from above can be also used to start hacking on nixpkgs:

.. code:: bash

      $ git clone git@github.com:NixOS/nixpkgs
      $ docker run -it -v $(pwd)/nixpkgs:/nixpkgs nixos/nix
      docker> nix-build -I nixpkgs=/nixpkgs -A hello
      docker> find ./result # this symlink points to the build package
   
Verify installation
-------------------

Check that the installation by opening **a new terminal** and typing:


.. code:: bash

   $ nix-env --version
   nix-env (Nix) 2.3.15

.. _verify the installation script: https://nixos.org/download.html#nix-verify-installation
