source/tutorials/installing-nixos-on-a-raspberry-pi.rst, before:

Installing NixOS on a Raspberry Pi
==================================

This tutorial assumes `Raspberry P 4 Model B with 4GB RAM <https://www.raspberrypi.org/products/raspberry-pi-4-model-b/>`_.

Before starting this tutorial, make sure you have 
`all necessary hardware <https://projects.raspberrypi.org/en/projects/raspberry-pi-setting-up/1>`_:

- HDMI cable/adapter.
- 8GB+ SD card.
- SD card reader in case your machine doesn't have an SD slot.
- Power cable for your Raspberry Pi.
- USB keyboard.

.. note:: 

  This tutorial was written for the Raspberry Pi 4B. Using a previous supported revision, like the 3B or 3B+, is possible with tweaks.


Booting NixOS live image
------------------------

.. note:: Booting from USB may require an EEPROM firmware upgrade. This tutorial boots from an SD card to avoid such hiccups.

Prepare the AArch64 image on your laptop:

.. code:: shell-session

  $ nix-shell -p wget zstd
  $ wget https://hydra.nixos.org/build/142828023/download/1/nixos-sd-image-21.05pre288297.8eed0e20953-aarch64-linux.img.zst
  $ unzstd -d nixos-sd-image-21.05pre288297.8eed0e20953-aarch64-linux.img.zst
  $ dmesg --follow

.. note::
  You can pick a newer image by going to `Hydra job <https://hydra.nixos.org/job/nixos/trunk-combined/nixos.sd_image_new_kernel.aarch64-linux>`_,
  clicking on a build and copying the link to the build product image.

Your terminal should be printing kernel messages as they come in.

Plug in your SD card and your terminal should print what device it got assigned, for example ``/dev/sdX``.

Press ``ctrl-c`` to stop ``dmesg --follow``.

Copy NixOS to your SD card by replacing ``sdX`` with the name of your device:

.. code:: shell-session 

  sudo dd if=nixos-sd-image-21.05pre288297.8eed0e20953-aarch64-linux.img of=/dev/sdX bs=4096 conv=fsync status=progress

Once that command exits, **move the SD card into your Raspberry Pi and power it on**.

You should be greeted with a fresh shell!


Getting internet connection
---------------------------

Run ``sudo -i`` to get a root shell for the rest of the tutorial.

At this point we'll need internet connection. If you can use an ethernet cable, plug it in.

In case you're connecting to a wifi run ``iwconfig`` to see what is the name of your wireless
network interface. In case it's ``wlan0`` replace ``SSID`` and ``passphrase`` with your data and run:

.. code:: shell-session 

  # wpa_supplicant -B -i wlan0 -c <(wpa_passphrase 'SSID' 'passphrase') &


Once you see in your terminal that connection is established, run ``host nixos.org`` to 
check that DNS resolves correctly.

In case you've made a typo, run ``pkill wpa_supplicant`` and start over.


Updating firmware
-----------------

To benefit from updates and bug fixes from the vendor, we'll start by updating Raspberry Pi firmware:

.. code:: shell-session

  # nix-shell -p raspberrypi-eeprom
  # mount /dev/disk/by-label/FIRMWARE /mnt
  # BOOTFS=/mnt FIRMWARE_RELEASE_STATUS=stable rpi-eeprom-update -d -a

  
Installing NixOS 
----------------

For initial installation we'll install `XFCE <https://www.xfce.org/>`_ desktop environment
with user ``guest`` and SSH daemon.

.. code:: nix 

  { config, pkgs, lib, ... }:

  let
    user = "guest";
    password = "guest";
    SSID = "mywifi";
    SSIDpassword = "mypassword";
    interface = "wlan0";
    hostname = "myhostname";
  in {
    imports = ["${fetchTarball "https://github.com/NixOS/nixos-hardware/archive/936e4649098d6a5e0762058cb7687be1b2d90550.tar.gz" }/raspberry-pi/4"];

    fileSystems = {
      "/" = {
        device = "/dev/disk/by-label/NIXOS_SD";
        fsType = "ext4";
        options = [ "noatime" ];
      };
    };

    networking = {
      hostName = hostname;
      wireless = {
        enable = true;
        networks."${SSID}".psk = SSIDpassword;
        interfaces = [ interface ];
      };
    };

    environment.systemPackages = with pkgs; [ vim ];

    services.openssh.enable = true;

    users = {
      mutableUsers = false;
      users."${user}" = {
        isNormalUser = true;
        password = password;
        extraGroups = [ "wheel" ];
      };
    };

    # Enable GPU acceleration
    hardware.raspberry-pi."4".fkms-3d.enable = true;

    services.xserver = {
      enable = true;
      displayManager.lightdm.enable = true;
      desktopManager.xfce.enable = true;
    };

    hardware.pulseaudio.enable = true;
  }

To save time on typing the whole configuration, download it:

.. code:: shell-session

  # curl -L https://tinyurl.com/nixos-rpi4-tutorial > /etc/nixos/configuration.nix 

At the top of `/etc/nixos/configuration.nix` there are a few variables that you want to configure,
most important being your wifi connection details, this time specified in declarative way.

Once you're ready to install NixOS:

.. code:: shell-session

  # nixos-install --root /
  # reboot

In case your system doesn't boot, select the oldest configuration in the bootloader menu to get back to live image and start over.


Making changes 
--------------

It booted, congratulations!

To make further changes to the configuration, `search through NixOS options <https://search.nixos.org/options>`_,
edit ``/etc/nixos/configuration.nix`` and update your system:

.. code:: shell-session 

  $ sudo -i
  # nixos-rebuild switch


Next steps
----------

- Once you have successfully running OS, try upgrading it with `nixos-rebuild switch --upgrade`
  and reboot to the old configuration if something broke.
  
- To tweak bootloader options affecting hardware, `see config.txt options <https://www.raspberrypi.org/documentation/configuration/config-txt/>`_
  and change the options by runnning ``mount /dev/disk/by-label/FIRMWARE /mnt`` and opening ``/mnt/config.txt``.

- To see the power of declarative configuration, try replacing ``xfce`` with ``kodi`` in ``/etc/nixos/configuration.nix`` and ``reboot``.

Commit message:

rpi: suggest updating firmware in case image doesn't boot

source/tutorials/installing-nixos-on-a-raspberry-pi.rst, after:

Installing NixOS on a Raspberry Pi
==================================

This tutorial assumes `Raspberry P 4 Model B with 4GB RAM <https://www.raspberrypi.org/products/raspberry-pi-4-model-b/>`_.

Before starting this tutorial, make sure you have 
`all necessary hardware <https://projects.raspberrypi.org/en/projects/raspberry-pi-setting-up/1>`_:

- HDMI cable/adapter.
- 8GB+ SD card.
- SD card reader in case your machine doesn't have an SD slot.
- Power cable for your Raspberry Pi.
- USB keyboard.

.. note:: 

  This tutorial was written for the Raspberry Pi 4B. Using a previous supported revision, like the 3B or 3B+, is possible with tweaks.


Booting NixOS live image
------------------------

.. note:: Booting from USB may require an EEPROM firmware upgrade. This tutorial boots from an SD card to avoid such hiccups.

Prepare the AArch64 image on your laptop:

.. code:: shell-session

  $ nix-shell -p wget zstd
  $ wget https://hydra.nixos.org/build/142828023/download/1/nixos-sd-image-21.05pre288297.8eed0e20953-aarch64-linux.img.zst
  $ unzstd -d nixos-sd-image-21.05pre288297.8eed0e20953-aarch64-linux.img.zst
  $ dmesg --follow

.. note::
  You can pick a newer image by going to `Hydra job <https://hydra.nixos.org/job/nixos/trunk-combined/nixos.sd_image_new_kernel.aarch64-linux>`_,
  clicking on a build and copying the link to the build product image.

Your terminal should be printing kernel messages as they come in.

Plug in your SD card and your terminal should print what device it got assigned, for example ``/dev/sdX``.

Press ``ctrl-c`` to stop ``dmesg --follow``.

Copy NixOS to your SD card by replacing ``sdX`` with the name of your device:

.. code:: shell-session 

  sudo dd if=nixos-sd-image-21.05pre288297.8eed0e20953-aarch64-linux.img of=/dev/sdX bs=4096 conv=fsync status=progress

Once that command exits, **move the SD card into your Raspberry Pi and power it on**.

You should be greeted with a fresh shell!

In case the image doesn't boot, it's worth `updating the firmware <https://www.raspberrypi.org/documentation/hardware/raspberrypi/booteeprom.md>`_
and retrying booting the image again.


Getting internet connection
---------------------------

Run ``sudo -i`` to get a root shell for the rest of the tutorial.

At this point we'll need internet connection. If you can use an ethernet cable, plug it in.

In case you're connecting to a wifi run ``iwconfig`` to see what is the name of your wireless
network interface. In case it's ``wlan0`` replace ``SSID`` and ``passphrase`` with your data and run:

.. code:: shell-session 

  # wpa_supplicant -B -i wlan0 -c <(wpa_passphrase 'SSID' 'passphrase') &


Once you see in your terminal that connection is established, run ``host nixos.org`` to 
check that DNS resolves correctly.

In case you've made a typo, run ``pkill wpa_supplicant`` and start over.


Updating firmware
-----------------

To benefit from updates and bug fixes from the vendor, we'll start by updating Raspberry Pi firmware:

.. code:: shell-session

  # nix-shell -p raspberrypi-eeprom
  # mount /dev/disk/by-label/FIRMWARE /mnt
  # BOOTFS=/mnt FIRMWARE_RELEASE_STATUS=stable rpi-eeprom-update -d -a

  
Installing NixOS 
----------------

For initial installation we'll install `XFCE <https://www.xfce.org/>`_ desktop environment
with user ``guest`` and SSH daemon.

.. code:: nix 

  { config, pkgs, lib, ... }:

  let
    user = "guest";
    password = "guest";
    SSID = "mywifi";
    SSIDpassword = "mypassword";
    interface = "wlan0";
    hostname = "myhostname";
  in {
    imports = ["${fetchTarball "https://github.com/NixOS/nixos-hardware/archive/936e4649098d6a5e0762058cb7687be1b2d90550.tar.gz" }/raspberry-pi/4"];

    fileSystems = {
      "/" = {
        device = "/dev/disk/by-label/NIXOS_SD";
        fsType = "ext4";
        options = [ "noatime" ];
      };
    };

    networking = {
      hostName = hostname;
      wireless = {
        enable = true;
        networks."${SSID}".psk = SSIDpassword;
        interfaces = [ interface ];
      };
    };

    environment.systemPackages = with pkgs; [ vim ];

    services.openssh.enable = true;

    users = {
      mutableUsers = false;
      users."${user}" = {
        isNormalUser = true;
        password = password;
        extraGroups = [ "wheel" ];
      };
    };

    # Enable GPU acceleration
    hardware.raspberry-pi."4".fkms-3d.enable = true;

    services.xserver = {
      enable = true;
      displayManager.lightdm.enable = true;
      desktopManager.xfce.enable = true;
    };

    hardware.pulseaudio.enable = true;
  }

To save time on typing the whole configuration, download it:

.. code:: shell-session

  # curl -L https://tinyurl.com/nixos-rpi4-tutorial > /etc/nixos/configuration.nix 

At the top of `/etc/nixos/configuration.nix` there are a few variables that you want to configure,
most important being your wifi connection details, this time specified in declarative way.

Once you're ready to install NixOS:

.. code:: shell-session

  # nixos-install --root /
  # reboot

In case your system doesn't boot, select the oldest configuration in the bootloader menu to get back to live image and start over.


Making changes 
--------------

It booted, congratulations!

To make further changes to the configuration, `search through NixOS options <https://search.nixos.org/options>`_,
edit ``/etc/nixos/configuration.nix`` and update your system:

.. code:: shell-session 

  $ sudo -i
  # nixos-rebuild switch


Next steps
----------

- Once you have successfully running OS, try upgrading it with `nixos-rebuild switch --upgrade`
  and reboot to the old configuration if something broke.
  
- To tweak bootloader options affecting hardware, `see config.txt options <https://www.raspberrypi.org/documentation/configuration/config-txt/>`_
  and change the options by runnning ``mount /dev/disk/by-label/FIRMWARE /mnt`` and opening ``/mnt/config.txt``.

- To see the power of declarative configuration, try replacing ``xfce`` with ``kodi`` in ``/etc/nixos/configuration.nix`` and ``reboot``.
