source/tutorials/towards-reproducibility-pinning-nixpkgs.rst, before:

.. _pinning-nixpkgs:

Towards reproducibility: Pinning nixpkgs
========================================

In various Nix examples, you'll often see references to `<nixpkgs> <https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs>`_, as follows.

.. code:: nix

    { pkgs ? import <nixpkgs> {}
    }:

    ...

This is **convenient** to quickly demonstrate a Nix expression and get it working by importing Nix packages.

However, the resulting Nix expression **is not fully reproducible**. The ``<nixpkgs>`` reference
is set from the **local** ``$NIX_PATH`` environment variable. In most cases, this is set at the time Nix is installed
to the ``nixpkgs-unstable`` channel, and therefore it is likely to differ from machine to machine.

.. note::
  `Channels <https://nixos.wiki/wiki/Nix_channels>`_ are a way of distributing Nix software, but they are being phased out.
  Even though they are still used by default, it is recommended to avoid channels
  and ``<nixpkgs>`` by always setting ``NIX_PATH=`` to be empty.

Pinning packages with URLs inside a Nix expression
--------------------------------------------------

To create **fully reproducible** Nix expressions, we can pin an exact versions of nixpkgs.

The simplest way to do this is to fetch the required nixpkgs version as a tarball specified via the relevant git commit hash:

.. code:: nix

    { pkgs ? import (fetchTarball "https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/archive/3590f02e7d5760e52072c1a729ee2250b5560746.tar.gz") {};
    }:

    ...

Picking the commit can be done via `status.nixos.org <https://status.nixos.org/>`_,
which lists all the releases and the latest commit that has passed all tests.

When choosing a commit, it is recommended to follow either

* the **latest stable NixOS** release by using a specific version, such as ``nixos-20.03``, **or**
* the latest **unstable release** via ``nixos-unstable``.

Dependency management with niv
------------------------------

If you'd like a bit more automation around bumping dependencies, including nixpkgs,
`niv <https://github.com/nmattia/niv/>`_ is made for exactly that. Niv itself is available
in ``nixpkgs`` so using it is simple::

    $ nix-shell -p niv --run "niv init"

This command will generate ``nix/sources.json`` with information about how and where
dependencies are fetched. It will also create ``nix/sources.nix`` which glues the sources together in Nix.

By default ``niv`` will use the **latest stable** NixOS release. However, you should check to see which version is currently specified in `the niv repository <https://github.com/nmattia/niv>`_ if you require a specific release, as it might lag behind.

You can use the generated ``sources.nix`` file as follows:

.. code:: nix

    { sources ? import ./sources.nix
    , pkgs ? import sources.nixpkgs {}
    }:

    ...

And you can update all the dependencies by running::

    $ nix-shell -p niv --run "niv update"


Going forward
-------------

For more examples and details of the different ways to pin ``nixpkgs``, see :ref:`ref-pinning-nixpkgs`.

Commit message:

fix #25: link getting started Nix template

source/tutorials/towards-reproducibility-pinning-nixpkgs.rst, after:

.. _pinning-nixpkgs:

Towards reproducibility: Pinning nixpkgs
========================================

In various Nix examples, you'll often see references to `<nixpkgs> <https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs>`_, as follows.

.. code:: nix

    { pkgs ? import <nixpkgs> {}
    }:

    ...

This is **convenient** to quickly demonstrate a Nix expression and get it working by importing Nix packages.

However, the resulting Nix expression **is not fully reproducible**. The ``<nixpkgs>`` reference
is set from the **local** ``$NIX_PATH`` environment variable. In most cases, this is set at the time Nix is installed
to the ``nixpkgs-unstable`` channel, and therefore it is likely to differ from machine to machine.

.. note::
  `Channels <https://nixos.wiki/wiki/Nix_channels>`_ are a way of distributing Nix software, but they are being phased out.
  Even though they are still used by default, it is recommended to avoid channels
  and ``<nixpkgs>`` by always setting ``NIX_PATH=`` to be empty.

Pinning packages with URLs inside a Nix expression
--------------------------------------------------

To create **fully reproducible** Nix expressions, we can pin an exact versions of nixpkgs.

The simplest way to do this is to fetch the required nixpkgs version as a tarball specified via the relevant git commit hash:

.. code:: nix

    { pkgs ? import (fetchTarball "https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/archive/3590f02e7d5760e52072c1a729ee2250b5560746.tar.gz") {};
    }:

    ...

Picking the commit can be done via `status.nixos.org <https://status.nixos.org/>`_,
which lists all the releases and the latest commit that has passed all tests.

When choosing a commit, it is recommended to follow either

* the **latest stable NixOS** release by using a specific version, such as ``nixos-20.03``, **or**
* the latest **unstable release** via ``nixos-unstable``.

Dependency management with niv
------------------------------

If you'd like a bit more automation around bumping dependencies, including nixpkgs,
`niv <https://github.com/nmattia/niv/>`_ is made for exactly that. Niv itself is available
in ``nixpkgs`` so using it is simple::

    $ nix-shell -p niv --run "niv init"

This command will generate ``nix/sources.json`` with information about how and where
dependencies are fetched. It will also create ``nix/sources.nix`` which glues the sources together in Nix.

By default ``niv`` will use the **latest stable** NixOS release. However, you should check to see which version is currently specified in `the niv repository <https://github.com/nmattia/niv>`_ if you require a specific release, as it might lag behind.

You can use the generated ``sources.nix`` file as follows:

.. code:: nix

    { sources ? import ./sources.nix
    , pkgs ? import sources.nixpkgs {}
    }:

    ...

And you can update all the dependencies by running::

    $ nix-shell -p niv --run "niv update"


Going forward
-------------

- For more examples and details of the different ways to pin ``nixpkgs``, see :ref:`ref-pinning-nixpkgs`.

- To quickly setup a Nix project read through 
  `Getting started Nix template <https://github.com/nix-dot-dev/getting-started-nix-template>`_.
