source/guides/troubleshooting.md, before:

# Troubleshooting

## What to do if a binary cache is down or unreachable?

Pass [`--option substitute false`](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/conf-file#conf-substitute) to Nix commands.

### How to fix: `error: querying path in database: database disk image is malformed`

This is a [known issue](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/issues/1353).
Try:

```shell-session
$ sqlite3 /nix/var/nix/db/db.sqlite "pragma integrity_check"
```

Which will print the errors in the [database](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/glossary#gloss-nix-database).
If the errors are due to missing references, the following may work:

```shell-session
$ mv /nix/var/nix/db/db.sqlite /nix/var/nix/db/db.sqlite-bkp
$ sqlite3 /nix/var/nix/db/db.sqlite-bkp ".dump" | sqlite3 /nix/var/nix/db/db.sqlite
```

### How to fix: `error: current Nix store schema is version 10, but I only support 7`

This is a [known issue](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/issues/1251).

It means that using a new version of Nix upgraded the SQLite schema of the [database](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/glossary#gloss-nix-database), and then you tried to use an older version Nix.

The solution is to dump the database, use the old Nix version to initialize it, and then re-import the data:

```shell-session
$ /path/to/nix/unstable/bin/nix-store --dump-db > /tmp/db.dump
$ mv /nix/var/nix/db /nix/var/nix/db.toonew
$ mkdir /nix/var/nix/db
$ nix-store --init # this is the old nix-store
$ nix-store --load-db < /tmp/db.dump
```

### How to fix: `writing to file: Connection reset by peer`

This may mean you are trying to import a too large file or directory into the [Nix store](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/glossary#gloss-store), or your machine is running out of resources, such as disk space or memory.

Try to reduce the size of the directory to import, or run [garbage collection](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/nix-collect-garbage).

Commit message:

move question on rechecking binary cache to a Nix recipe  (#808)
* mv question -f faqs -t nix-recipes

* add nix-recipes to page index and fix hierarchy

* change question to statement

* rephrase a few sentences and add links

* move the question to troubleshooting

* fix broken link

---------

Co-authored-by: Valentin Gagarin <valentin.gagarin@tweag.io>

source/guides/troubleshooting.md, after:

# Troubleshooting

This page is a collection of tips to solve problems you may encounter using Nix.

## What to do if a binary cache is down or unreachable?

Pass [`--option substitute false`](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/conf-file#conf-substitute) to Nix commands.

## How to force Nix to re-check if something exists in the binary cache?

Nix keeps track of what's available in binary caches so it doesn't have to query them on every command.
This includes negative answers, that is, if a given store path cannot substituted.

Pass the [`--narinfo-cache-negative-ttl`](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/conf-file.html#conf-narinfo-cache-negative-ttl) option to set the cache timeout in seconds.

## How to fix: `error: querying path in database: database disk image is malformed`

This is a [known issue](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/issues/1353).
Try:

```shell-session
$ sqlite3 /nix/var/nix/db/db.sqlite "pragma integrity_check"
```

Which will print the errors in the [database](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/glossary#gloss-nix-database).
If the errors are due to missing references, the following may work:

```shell-session
$ mv /nix/var/nix/db/db.sqlite /nix/var/nix/db/db.sqlite-bkp
$ sqlite3 /nix/var/nix/db/db.sqlite-bkp ".dump" | sqlite3 /nix/var/nix/db/db.sqlite
```

## How to fix: `error: current Nix store schema is version 10, but I only support 7`

This is a [known issue](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/issues/1251).

It means that using a new version of Nix upgraded the SQLite schema of the [database](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/glossary#gloss-nix-database), and then you tried to use an older version Nix.

The solution is to dump the database, use the old Nix version to initialize it, and then re-import the data:

```shell-session
$ /path/to/nix/unstable/bin/nix-store --dump-db > /tmp/db.dump
$ mv /nix/var/nix/db /nix/var/nix/db.toonew
$ mkdir /nix/var/nix/db
$ nix-store --init # this is the old nix-store
$ nix-store --load-db < /tmp/db.dump
```

## How to fix: `writing to file: Connection reset by peer`

This may mean you are trying to import a too large file or directory into the [Nix store](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/glossary#gloss-store), or your machine is running out of resources, such as disk space or memory.

Try to reduce the size of the directory to import, or run [garbage collection](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/nix-collect-garbage).
