source/tutorials/first-steps/declarative-and-reproducible-developer-environments.md, before:

(declarative-reproducible-envs)=

# Declarative and reproducible developer environments

In the {ref}`ad-hoc-envs` tutorial, we looked at imperatively creating shell environments using `nix-shell -p`, for when we need a quick way to access some tools without having to install them globally. We also saw how to execute that command with a specific nixpkgs git commit as an argument, to recreate the same environment used previously.

In this tutorial, we'll see how to *declaratively* create {term}`reproducible` shell environments using a configuration file called a Nix expression.

## When are declarative shell environments useful?

Both methods of creating development shell environments allow you to provide CLI tools like `psql`, `jq`, and `tmux`, as well as developer libraries like `zlib` and `openssl`. However, only the *declarative* approach allows you to

- automatically set shell environment variables,
- execute bash commands during environment activation, and
- share the exact same environment with other developers.

In addition to these, declaring development environments in Nix expression files enables you to use all the source code workflows you're used to, like committing that file to version control, using code analysis tools, and so on.

## Getting started

At the top-level of your project create `shell.nix` with the following contents:

```nix
{ pkgs ? import (fetchTarball "https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/archive/06278c77b5d162e62df170fec307e83f1812d94b.tar.gz") {} }:

pkgs.mkShell {
  buildInputs = [
    pkgs.which
    pkgs.htop
    pkgs.zlib
  ];
}
```

:::{note}
To understand the first line, read our tutorial on {ref}`pinning Nixpkgs`<ref-pinning-nixpkgs>.
:::

We import `nixpkgs` and make a shell with `which` and `htop` available in `$PATH`. We use `zlib` to provide libraries and headers in case we're compiling something against it.

To enter the environment:

```shell-session
$ nix-shell
these paths will be fetched (0.07 MiB download, 0.20 MiB unpacked):
  /nix/store/072a6x7rwv5f8wr6f5s1rq8nnm767cfp-htop-2.2.0
copying path '/nix/store/072a6x7rwv5f8wr6f5s1rq8nnm767cfp-htop-2.2.0' from 'https://cache.nixos.org'...

[nix-shell:~]$
```

This command will start downloading the missing packages from the <https://cache.nixos.org> binary cache.

Once the download is done, you are dropped into a new shell. This shell provides the packages specified in `shell.nix`.

Run `htop` to confirm that it is present. Quit the program by hitting `q`.

Now try `which htop` to check where the `htop` command is on disk. You should see something similar to this:

```shell-session
[nix-shell:~]$ which htop
/nix/store/y3w2i8kfdbfj9rx287ad52rahjpgv423-htop-2.2.0/bin/htop
```

## Customizing your developer environment

Given the following `shell.nix`:

```nix
{ pkgs ? import (fetchTarball "https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/archive/06278c77b5d162e62df170fec307e83f1812d94b.tar.gz") {} }:

pkgs.mkShell {
  buildInputs = [
    pkgs.which
    pkgs.htop
    pkgs.zlib
  ];

  shellHook = ''
    echo hello
  '';

  MY_ENVIRONMENT_VARIABLE = "world";
}
```

Running `nix-shell` we observe:

```shell-session
$ nix-shell
hello

[nix-shell:~]$ echo $MY_ENVIRONMENT_VARIABLE
world
```

- The `shellHook` section allows you to execute bash while entering the shell environment.
- Any attributes passed to `mkShell` function are available once the shell environment is active.

## `direnv`: Automatically activating the environment on directory change

Besides activating the environment for each project, every time you change `shell.nix` you need to re-enter the shell.

You can use `direnv` to automate this process for you, with the downside that each developer needs to install it globally.

### Setting up `direnv`

1. [Install nix-direnv with your package manager or from source](https://github.com/nix-community/nix-direnv)
2. [Hook it into your shell](https://direnv.net/docs/hook.html)

At the top-level of your project run:

```shell-session
$ echo "use nix" > .envrc && direnv allow
```

The next time you launch your terminal and enter the top-level of your project, `direnv` will check for changes.

```shell-session
$ cd myproject
direnv: loading myproject/.envrc
direnv: using nix
hello
```

## Next steps

- Take a look at our {ref}`pinning Nixpkgs` tutorial to see different ways to import Nixpkgs.
- To quickly set up a Nix project, read [Getting started Nix template](https://github.com/nix-dot-dev/getting-started-nix-template).

Commit message:

reword some parts of the getting started section. some bikeshedding

source/tutorials/first-steps/declarative-and-reproducible-developer-environments.md, after:

(declarative-reproducible-envs)=

# Declarative and reproducible developer environments

In the {ref}`ad-hoc-envs` tutorial, we looked at imperatively creating shell environments using `nix-shell -p`, for when we need a quick way to access some tools without having to install them globally. We also saw how to execute that command with a specific nixpkgs git commit as an argument, to recreate the same environment used previously.

In this tutorial, we'll see how to *declaratively* create {term}`reproducible` shell environments using a configuration file called a Nix expression.

## When are declarative shell environments useful?

Both methods of creating development shell environments allow you to provide CLI tools like `psql`, `jq`, and `tmux`, as well as developer libraries like `zlib` and `openssl`. However, only the *declarative* approach allows you to

- automatically set shell environment variables,
- execute bash commands during environment activation, and
- share the exact same environment with other developers.

In addition to these, declaring development environments in Nix expression files enables you to use all the source code workflows you're used to, like committing that file to version control, using code analysis tools, and so on.

## Getting started

At the top-level of your project, create `shell.nix` with the following contents:

```nix
{ pkgs ? import (fetchTarball "https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/archive/06278c77b5d162e62df170fec307e83f1812d94b.tar.gz") {} }:

pkgs.mkShell {
  buildInputs = [
    pkgs.which
    pkgs.htop
    pkgs.zlib
  ];
}
```

:::{note}
To better understand the first line, read through the tutorial on {ref}`pinning nixpkgs <ref-pinning-nixpkgs>`.
:::

This expression imports `nixpkgs`, then creates a shell with `which` and `htop` available in `$PATH`. `zlib` is also added, to provide some common libraries and headers in case we need to compile something against it.

To enter the environment, run `nix-shell` in the same directory as `shell.nix`:

```shell-session
$ nix-shell
these paths will be fetched (0.07 MiB download, 0.20 MiB unpacked):
  /nix/store/072a6x7rwv5f8wr6f5s1rq8nnm767cfp-htop-2.2.0
copying path '/nix/store/072a6x7rwv5f8wr6f5s1rq8nnm767cfp-htop-2.2.0' from 'https://cache.nixos.org'...

[nix-shell:~]$
```

This command will start downloading the missing packages from the <https://cache.nixos.org> binary cache.

Once the download completes, you are dropped into a new shell, which provides the packages specified in `shell.nix`.

Run `htop` to confirm that it is present. Quit the program by hitting `q`.

Now try `which htop` to check where the `htop` executable is stored in the filesystem. You should see something similar to this:

```shell-session
[nix-shell:~]$ which htop
/nix/store/y3w2i8kfdbfj9rx287ad52rahjpgv423-htop-2.2.0/bin/htop
```

## Customizing your developer environment

Given the following `shell.nix`:

```nix
{ pkgs ? import (fetchTarball "https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/archive/06278c77b5d162e62df170fec307e83f1812d94b.tar.gz") {} }:

pkgs.mkShell {
  buildInputs = [
    pkgs.which
    pkgs.htop
    pkgs.zlib
  ];

  shellHook = ''
    echo hello
  '';

  MY_ENVIRONMENT_VARIABLE = "world";
}
```

Running `nix-shell` we observe:

```shell-session
$ nix-shell
hello

[nix-shell:~]$ echo $MY_ENVIRONMENT_VARIABLE
world
```

- The `shellHook` section allows you to execute bash while entering the shell environment.
- Any attributes passed to `mkShell` function are available once the shell environment is active.

## `direnv`: Automatically activating the environment on directory change

Besides activating the environment for each project, every time you change `shell.nix` you need to re-enter the shell.

You can use `direnv` to automate this process for you, with the downside that each developer needs to install it globally.

### Setting up `direnv`

1. [Install nix-direnv with your package manager or from source](https://github.com/nix-community/nix-direnv)
2. [Hook it into your shell](https://direnv.net/docs/hook.html)

At the top-level of your project run:

```shell-session
$ echo "use nix" > .envrc && direnv allow
```

The next time you launch your terminal and enter the top-level of your project, `direnv` will check for changes.

```shell-session
$ cd myproject
direnv: loading myproject/.envrc
direnv: using nix
hello
```

## Next steps

- Take a look at our {ref}`pinning Nixpkgs` tutorial to see different ways to import Nixpkgs.
- To quickly set up a Nix project, read [Getting started Nix template](https://github.com/nix-dot-dev/getting-started-nix-template).
