source/tutorials/first-steps/reproducible-scripts.md, before:

(reproducible-scripts)=

# Reproducible interpreted scripts

In this tutorial, you will learn how to use Nix to create and run reproducible interpreted scripts, also known as [shebang] scripts.

## Requirements

- A working {ref}`Nix installation <install-nix>`
- Familiarity with [Bash]

## A trivial script with non-trivial dependencies

Take the following script, which fetches the content XML of a URL, converts it to JSON, and formats it for better readability:

```bash
#! /bin/bash

curl https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/releases.atom | xml2json | jq .
```

It requires the programs `curl`, `xml2json`, and `jq`.
It also requires the `bash` interpreter.
If any of these dependencies are not present on the system running the script, it will fail partially or altogether.

With Nix, we can declare all dependencies explicitly, and produce a script that will always run on any machine that supports Nix and the required packages taken from Nixpkgs.

## The script

A [shebang] determines which program to use for running an interpreted script.

[Bash]: https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/
[shebang]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shebang_(Unix)

We will use the shebang line `#! /usr/bin/env nix-shell`.

[`env`] is a program available on most modern Unix-like operating systems at the file system path `/usr/bin/env`.
It takes a command name as argument and will run the first executable by that name it finds in the directories listed in the environment variable `$PATH`.

[`env`]: https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/utilities/env.html

We use [`nix-shell` as a shebang interpreter].
It takes the following parameters relevant for our use case:

- `-i` tells which program to use for interpreting the rest of the file
- `--pure` excludes most environment variables when the script is run
- `-p` lists packages that should be present in the interpreter's environment
- `-I` explicitly sets [the search path] for packages

More details on the options can be found in the [`nix-shell` reference documentation](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/nix-shell.html#options).

[`nix-shell` as a shebang interpreter]: https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/nix-shell.html#use-as-a--interpreter
[the search path]: https://nixos.org/manual/nix/unstable/command-ref/opt-common.html#opt-I

Create a file named `nixpkgs-releases.sh` with the following content:

```shell
#!/usr/bin/env nix-shell 
#! nix-shell -i bash --pure
#! nix-shell -p bash cacert curl jq python3Packages.xmljson
#! nix-shell -I nixpkgs=https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/archive/2a601aafdc5605a5133a2ca506a34a3a73377247.tar.gz

curl https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/releases.atom | xml2json | jq .
```

We specify the `bash` program as the interpreter with the `-i` option.
We enable the `--pure` option to prevent the script from implicitly using programs that may already exist on the system that will run the script.

With the `-p` option we specify the packages required for the script to run.
The command `xml2json` is provided by the package `python3Packages.xmljson`, while `bash`, `jq`, and `curl` are provided by packages of the same name. `cacert` must be present for SSL authentication to work. Use [search.nixos.org](https://search.nixos.org/packages) to find packages providing the program you need.

The parameter of `-I` refers to a specific Git commit of the Nixpkgs repository.
This ensures that the script will always run with the exact same packages versions, everywhere.

Make the script executable:

 ```console
 chmod +x nixpkgs-releases.sh
 ```
 
Run the script:

```console
./nixpkgs-releases.sh
```

## Next steps

- {ref}`reading-nix-language` to learn about the Nix language, which is used to declare packages and configurations.
- {ref}`declarative-reproducible-envs` to create reproducible shell environments with a declarative configuration file.
- [Garbage Collection](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/package-management/garbage-collection.html) – free up storage used by the programs made available through Nix

Commit message:

Explain what this construct is
> The chained script interpreter to be invoked

Chained is mentioned here but then also forgotten about: https://nixos.org/manual/nix/unstable/command-ref/nix-shell.html

Mostly it's unclear here why there are multiple weird hashbang lines there that are the same.

Also it's not great that here an entirely new construct is introduced that probably nobody will have ever seen before and to understand what it does you have to go to several different off-site documentation pages.

Can this be rewritten to be more standalone?

source/tutorials/first-steps/reproducible-scripts.md, after:

(reproducible-scripts)=

# Reproducible interpreted scripts

In this tutorial, you will learn how to use Nix to create and run reproducible interpreted scripts, also known as [shebang] scripts.

## Requirements

- A working {ref}`Nix installation <install-nix>`
- Familiarity with [Bash]

## A trivial script with non-trivial dependencies

Take the following script, which fetches the content XML of a URL, converts it to JSON, and formats it for better readability:

```bash
#! /bin/bash

curl https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/releases.atom | xml2json | jq .
```

It requires the programs `curl`, `xml2json`, and `jq`.
It also requires the `bash` interpreter.
If any of these dependencies are not present on the system running the script, it will fail partially or altogether.

With Nix, we can declare all dependencies explicitly, and produce a script that will always run on any machine that supports Nix and the required packages taken from Nixpkgs.

## The script

A [shebang] determines which program to use for running an interpreted script.

[Bash]: https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/
[shebang]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shebang_(Unix)

We will use the shebang line `#! /usr/bin/env nix-shell`.

[`env`] is a program available on most modern Unix-like operating systems at the file system path `/usr/bin/env`.
It takes a command name as argument and will run the first executable by that name it finds in the directories listed in the environment variable `$PATH`.

[`env`]: https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/utilities/env.html

We use [`nix-shell` as a shebang interpreter].
It takes the following parameters relevant for our use case:

- `-i` tells which program to use for interpreting the rest of the file
- `--pure` excludes most environment variables when the script is run
- `-p` lists packages that should be present in the interpreter's environment
- `-I` explicitly sets [the search path] for packages

More details on the options can be found in the [`nix-shell` reference documentation](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/nix-shell.html#options).

[`nix-shell` as a shebang interpreter]: https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/nix-shell.html#use-as-a--interpreter
[the search path]: https://nixos.org/manual/nix/unstable/command-ref/opt-common.html#opt-I

Create a file named `nixpkgs-releases.sh` with the following content:

```shell
#!/usr/bin/env nix-shell 
#! nix-shell -i bash --pure
#! nix-shell -p bash cacert curl jq python3Packages.xmljson
#! nix-shell -I nixpkgs=https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/archive/2a601aafdc5605a5133a2ca506a34a3a73377247.tar.gz

curl https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/releases.atom | xml2json | jq .
```

The first line is a standard hashbang. The additional hashbang lines are a Nix specific construct. The rest of the file is taken to be bash code because of the `-i bash` parameter.

We specify the `bash` program as the interpreter with the `-i` option.

We enable the `--pure` option to prevent the script from implicitly using programs that may already exist on the system that will run the script.

With the `-p` option we specify the packages required for the script to run.
The command `xml2json` is provided by the package `python3Packages.xmljson`, while `bash`, `jq`, and `curl` are provided by packages of the same name. `cacert` must be present for SSL authentication to work. Use [search.nixos.org](https://search.nixos.org/packages) to find packages providing the program you need.

The parameter of `-I` refers to a specific Git commit of the Nixpkgs repository.
This ensures that the script will always run with the exact same packages versions, everywhere.

Make the script executable:

 ```console
 chmod +x nixpkgs-releases.sh
 ```
 
Run the script:

```console
./nixpkgs-releases.sh
```

## Next steps

- {ref}`reading-nix-language` to learn about the Nix language, which is used to declare packages and configurations.
- {ref}`declarative-reproducible-envs` to create reproducible shell environments with a declarative configuration file.
- [Garbage Collection](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/package-management/garbage-collection.html) – free up storage used by the programs made available through Nix
