maintainers/working_groups/learning_journey/documentation-survey.md, before:

# Documentation survey

To better navigate the material and judge its relevance, every entry should provide
  - Title (URL)
  - Brief summary
  - Video length or estimated reading time
  - Principal Author(s)
  - Year created (last update or maintenance status)

## Tutorials

### Nix

- [Nix Pills Chapter 3: Enter the Environment](https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/enter-environment.html)

  Installation with `nix-env`, rollback and switching generations, showing references and closures.

  - Reading time: 7 min
  - Author: Luca Bruno
  - Created: 2015 (effectively unmaintained since 2017)

- [Nix Pills Chapter 6. Our First Derivation](https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/our-first-derivation.html)

  Fundamentals of Nix derivations, function and concept, `nix show-derivation`. Derivation set and its attributes.
  - Reading time: 20 min
  - Author: Luca Bruno
  - Created: 2015 (effectively unmaintained since 2017)

- [Nix Pills Chapter 7. Working Derivation](https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/working-derivation.html)

  Fundamentals of Nix derivations, bash, `nix repl`, `nix-store`,  `nix-instantiate`, `nix show-derivation` . Packaging a simple C program, `inherit` keyword.
  - Reading time: 16 min
  - Author: Luca Bruno
  - Created: 2015 (effectively unmaintained since 2017)

- [Nix Pills Chapter 11. Garbage Collector](https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/garbage-collector.html)

  Fundamentals of Nix garbage collection, `nix-collect-garbage`, `nix-env`, `nix-store`,  `nix-build`.
  - Reading time: 14 min
  - Author: Luca Bruno
  - Created: 2015 (effectively unmaintained since 2017)

- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/nix-search-paths.html
- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/nix-store-paths.html

### Nix language

- https://learnxinyminutes.com/docs/nix/
- https://nixcloud.io/tour/?id=1
- https://medium.com/@MrJamesFisher/nix-by-example-a0063a1a4c55
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eCapIx9heBw&list=PL-saUBvIJzOkjAw_vOac75v-x6EzNzZq-&index=5
- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/basics-of-language.html

- [Nix Pills Chapter 4. The basics of the language](https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/basics-of-language.html)

  Fundamentals of Nix language, types, expressions `nix repl`.
  - Reading time: 16 min
  - Author: Luca Bruno
  - Created: 2015 (effectively unmaintained since 2017)

- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/functions-and-imports.html

### Nixpkgs

- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SGekN4pDExY&list=PL-saUBvIJzOkjAw_vOac75v-x6EzNzZq-&index=6
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m4sv2M9jRLg
- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/generic-builders.html
- [Nix Pills Chapter 8. Generic Builders](https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/generic-builders.html)

  Generalized building process (C language), `derivation`, `nix repl`, `nix-build`.
  - Reading time: 14 min
  - Author: Luca Bruno
  - Created: 2015 (effectively unmaintained since 2017)

- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/automatic-runtime-dependencies.html
- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/developing-with-nix-shell.html

- [Nix Pills Chapter 10. Developing with nix-shell](https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/developing-with-nix-shell.html)

  Making a development environment from a derivation that can be launched with `nix-shell`, `builtins.derivation`.
  - Reading time: 9 min
  - Author: Luca Bruno
  - Created: 2015 (effectively unmaintained since 2017)

- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/inputs-design-pattern.html
- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/callpackage-design-pattern.html
- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/override-design-pattern.html
- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/nixpkgs-parameters.html
- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/nixpkgs-overriding-packages.html
- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/fundamentals-of-stdenv.html
- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/basic-dependencies-and-hooks.html

### NixOS

- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jf0nIn2oS8A&list=PL-saUBvIJzOkjAw_vOac75v-x6EzNzZq-&index=4

## How-To Guides

### Nix

- https://nix.dev/tutorials/ad-hoc-developer-environments#what-is-a-shell-environment
- https://nixos.wiki/wiki/Nix_Cookbook#Managing_storage

### Nix language

- https://nix.dev/anti-patterns/language.html

### Nixpkgs

- https://nixos.wiki/wiki/FAQ
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D_IZ2EfW_8U
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5K_2RSjbdXc
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dGAL3gMXvug
- https://nix.dev/tutorials/towards-reproducibility-pinning-nixpkgs
- https://nix.dev/tutorials/declarative-and-reproducible-developer-environments
- https://nix.dev/tutorials/cross-compilation.html
- https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable

### NixOS

- https://nix.dev/tutorials/building-bootable-iso-image.html
- https://nix.dev/tutorials/deploying-nixos-using-terraform.html
- https://nix.dev/tutorials/installing-nixos-on-a-raspberry-pi.html
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bkDYmvKINm8
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zi_vbddNXtg
- https://github.com/noteed/nix-notes
- https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/

## Explanation

### Nix

- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/index.html
- partially in chapter https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/automatic-runtime-dependencies.html
- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/garbage-collector.html
- https://edolstra.github.io/pubs/phd-thesis.pdf

### Nix language

- https://edolstra.github.io/pubs/phd-thesis.pdf

### Nixpkgs

- [Nix Pills Chapter 6: Our First Derivation](https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/our-first-derivation.html)

  Explains derivations; the derivation function, its attribute set, `.drv` and 'out' files. Explains `outpath`. Regarding `nixpkgs`, shows how to bring `nixpkgs` into scope and how to refer to a package using its `outpath`. Accessing files underneath a package's `out`.

  - Reading time: 25 min
  - Author: Luca Bruno
  - Created: 2015
  - Updated 2017

- [Nix Pills Chapter 7: Working Derivation](https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/working-derivation.html)

  Creating a working derivation. Using `nix repl`: `bash` as a builder; the `args` attribute; creating in `$out`; the builder environment; packaging a C program. Using a `.nix` file to define the derivation: `import` function; `inherit` keyword; using `nix-build`. Explains how to use `gcc`, `bash` and `coreutils` from nixpkgs.
  - Reading time: 15 min
  - Author: Luca Bruno
  - Created: 2015 (effectively unmaintained since 2017)

- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/inputs-design-pattern.html
- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/callpackage-design-pattern.html
- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/callpackage-design-pattern.html
- partially in https://edolstra.github.io/pubs/phd-thesis.pdf

- [Connecting Bash to Nix](https://www.zombiezen.com/blog/2023/03/connecting-bash-to-nix/)

  Configure derivation using only Bash and `builtins`. Explains `builtins.derivation`, attributes, `nix build`, store path hierarchy, imports.
  Relates this to `stdenv.mkDerivation.
  - Reading time: 10 min
  - Author: Ross Light
  - Created: 2023

### NixOS
- https://nixos.org/docs/SCR-2005-091.pdf (2006)

## Reference

### Nix

- https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/command-ref.html
- https://edolstra.github.io/pubs/phd-thesis.pdf

### Nix language

- https://edolstra.github.io/pubs/phd-thesis.pdf
- https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/expressions/writing-nix-expressions.html
- https://github.com/tazjin/nix-1p

### Nixpkgs

- https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable

### NixOS
- https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable

Commit message:

Document survey (#624) (#625)
* Update documentation-survey.md

Summarize https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/inputs-design-pattern.html

* Update documentation-survey.md

Fix typo

Co-authored-by: JillThornhill <121565493+JillThornhill@users.noreply.github.com>

maintainers/working_groups/learning_journey/documentation-survey.md, after:

# Documentation survey

To better navigate the material and judge its relevance, every entry should provide
  - Title (URL)
  - Brief summary
  - Video length or estimated reading time
  - Principal Author(s)
  - Year created (last update or maintenance status)

## Tutorials

### Nix

- [Nix Pills Chapter 3: Enter the Environment](https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/enter-environment.html)

  Installation with `nix-env`, rollback and switching generations, showing references and closures.

  - Reading time: 7 min
  - Author: Luca Bruno
  - Created: 2015 (effectively unmaintained since 2017)

- [Nix Pills Chapter 6. Our First Derivation](https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/our-first-derivation.html)

  Fundamentals of Nix derivations, function and concept, `nix show-derivation`. Derivation set and its attributes.
  - Reading time: 20 min
  - Author: Luca Bruno
  - Created: 2015 (effectively unmaintained since 2017)

- [Nix Pills Chapter 7. Working Derivation](https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/working-derivation.html)

  Fundamentals of Nix derivations, bash, `nix repl`, `nix-store`,  `nix-instantiate`, `nix show-derivation` . Packaging a simple C program, `inherit` keyword.
  - Reading time: 16 min
  - Author: Luca Bruno
  - Created: 2015 (effectively unmaintained since 2017)

- [Nix Pills Chapter 11. Garbage Collector](https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/garbage-collector.html)

  Fundamentals of Nix garbage collection, `nix-collect-garbage`, `nix-env`, `nix-store`,  `nix-build`.
  - Reading time: 14 min
  - Author: Luca Bruno
  - Created: 2015 (effectively unmaintained since 2017)

- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/nix-search-paths.html
- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/nix-store-paths.html

### Nix language

- https://learnxinyminutes.com/docs/nix/
- https://nixcloud.io/tour/?id=1
- https://medium.com/@MrJamesFisher/nix-by-example-a0063a1a4c55
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eCapIx9heBw&list=PL-saUBvIJzOkjAw_vOac75v-x6EzNzZq-&index=5
- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/basics-of-language.html

- [Nix Pills Chapter 4. The basics of the language](https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/basics-of-language.html)

  Fundamentals of Nix language, types, expressions `nix repl`.
  - Reading time: 16 min
  - Author: Luca Bruno
  - Created: 2015 (effectively unmaintained since 2017)

- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/functions-and-imports.html

### Nixpkgs

- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SGekN4pDExY&list=PL-saUBvIJzOkjAw_vOac75v-x6EzNzZq-&index=6
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m4sv2M9jRLg
- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/generic-builders.html
- [Nix Pills Chapter 8. Generic Builders](https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/generic-builders.html)

  Generalized building process (C language), `derivation`, `nix repl`, `nix-build`.
  - Reading time: 14 min
  - Author: Luca Bruno
  - Created: 2015 (effectively unmaintained since 2017)

- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/automatic-runtime-dependencies.html
- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/developing-with-nix-shell.html

- [Nix Pills Chapter 10. Developing with nix-shell](https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/developing-with-nix-shell.html)

  Making a development environment from a derivation that can be launched with `nix-shell`, `builtins.derivation`.
  - Reading time: 9 min
  - Author: Luca Bruno
  - Created: 2015 (effectively unmaintained since 2017)

- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/inputs-design-pattern.html
- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/callpackage-design-pattern.html
- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/override-design-pattern.html
- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/nixpkgs-parameters.html
- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/nixpkgs-overriding-packages.html
- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/fundamentals-of-stdenv.html
- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/basic-dependencies-and-hooks.html

### NixOS

- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jf0nIn2oS8A&list=PL-saUBvIJzOkjAw_vOac75v-x6EzNzZq-&index=4

## How-To Guides

### Nix

- https://nix.dev/tutorials/ad-hoc-developer-environments#what-is-a-shell-environment
- https://nixos.wiki/wiki/Nix_Cookbook#Managing_storage

### Nix language

- https://nix.dev/anti-patterns/language.html

### Nixpkgs

- https://nixos.wiki/wiki/FAQ
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D_IZ2EfW_8U
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5K_2RSjbdXc
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dGAL3gMXvug
- https://nix.dev/tutorials/towards-reproducibility-pinning-nixpkgs
- https://nix.dev/tutorials/declarative-and-reproducible-developer-environments
- https://nix.dev/tutorials/cross-compilation.html
- https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable

### NixOS

- https://nix.dev/tutorials/building-bootable-iso-image.html
- https://nix.dev/tutorials/deploying-nixos-using-terraform.html
- https://nix.dev/tutorials/installing-nixos-on-a-raspberry-pi.html
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bkDYmvKINm8
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zi_vbddNXtg
- https://github.com/noteed/nix-notes
- https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/

## Explanation

### Nix

- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/index.html
- partially in chapter https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/automatic-runtime-dependencies.html
- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/garbage-collector.html
- https://edolstra.github.io/pubs/phd-thesis.pdf

### Nix language

- https://edolstra.github.io/pubs/phd-thesis.pdf

### Nixpkgs

- [Nix Pills Chapter 6: Our First Derivation](https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/our-first-derivation.html)

  Explains derivations; the derivation function, its attribute set, `.drv` and 'out' files. Explains `outpath`. Regarding `nixpkgs`, shows how to bring `nixpkgs` into scope and how to refer to a package using its `outpath`. Accessing files underneath a package's `out`.

  - Reading time: 25 min
  - Author: Luca Bruno
  - Created: 2015
  - Updated 2017

- [Nix Pills Chapter 7: Working Derivation](https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/working-derivation.html)

  Creating a working derivation. Using `nix repl`: `bash` as a builder; the `args` attribute; creating in `$out`; the builder environment; packaging a C program. Using a `.nix` file to define the derivation: `import` function; `inherit` keyword; using `nix-build`. Explains how to use `gcc`, `bash` and `coreutils` from nixpkgs.
  - Reading time: 15 min
  - Author: Luca Bruno
  - Created: 2015 (effectively unmaintained since 2017)

- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/inputs-design-pattern.html
  
  Explains the `inputs` design pattern as used by `nixpkgs`. A single customizable repository having a top-level Nix expression, with one expression for each package.

  - Reading time: 20 min
  - Author: Luca Bruno
  - Created: 2015 (effectively unmaintained since 2017)


- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/callpackage-design-pattern.html
- https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/callpackage-design-pattern.html
- partially in https://edolstra.github.io/pubs/phd-thesis.pdf

- [Connecting Bash to Nix](https://www.zombiezen.com/blog/2023/03/connecting-bash-to-nix/)

  Configure derivation using only Bash and `builtins`. Explains `builtins.derivation`, attributes, `nix build`, store path hierarchy, imports.
  Relates this to `stdenv.mkDerivation.
  - Reading time: 10 min
  - Author: Ross Light
  - Created: 2023

### NixOS
- https://nixos.org/docs/SCR-2005-091.pdf (2006)

## Reference

### Nix

- https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/command-ref.html
- https://edolstra.github.io/pubs/phd-thesis.pdf

### Nix language

- https://edolstra.github.io/pubs/phd-thesis.pdf
- https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/expressions/writing-nix-expressions.html
- https://github.com/tazjin/nix-1p

### Nixpkgs

- https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable

### NixOS
- https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable
