source/tutorials/packaging/contributing-to-nixpkgs.md, before:

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    "description lang=en": "Contributing to Nixpkgs"
    "keywords": "Nix, Nixpkgs, contributing"
---


(contributing-to-nixpkgs)=

# Contributing to Nixpkgs

[Nixpkgs](https://github.com/nixos/nixpkgs) is one of the largest public repositories by contributions and *the* largest single collection of software packages available on the web.

In this tutorial, which follows {ref}`the tutorial on packaging existing software <packaging-existing-software>`, you will learn how to prepare newly-packaged software for submission to Nixpkgs, becoming a Nixpkgs contributor in the process.

## Tags, Revisions, and Releases
An earlier version of the `icat.nix` definition created in the {ref}`Packaging Existing Software <packaging-existing-software>` tutorial used the `master` revision of the [upstream `icat` repository](https://github.com/atextor/icat), which would be suitable for individual use but isn't good practice for submission to Nixpkgs.

It is much better to use a fixed revision corresponding to a particular release version of the software so maintainers (perhaps you!) can easily check whether the package should be updated.

This was already done in the previous tutorial, but as a reminder, here are the steps:
1. Check the upstream repository for tags or releases. On GitHub, these are available at `https://github.com/<owner>/<repo>/tags` and `https://github.com/<owner>/<repo>/releases` respectively.
2. Choose the latest tag or release and write it into a string literal as the value of the `rev` attribute passed to the [fetcher](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#chap-pkgs-fetchers).
3. Use `nix-prefetch-url` or a similar tool to fetch, unpack, and hash the files marked by the tag or release you selected.
4. Alternatively, you can also use a tool such as `nix-init` to automatically generate a required derivation for some common project types, or use its output to help lay down a skeleton implementation of the above steps.

In the `icat` example, the source was hosted on GitHub, so `fetchFromGitHub` was used for the `src` attribute passed to `stdenv.mkDerivation`, with `rev = "v0.5"` corresponding to the latest tag, and a SHA256 hash generated by

```console
nix-prefetch-url --unpack https://github.com/atextor/icat/archive/refs/tags/v0.5.tar.gz --type sha256`
```

Here is the final version of `icat.nix` from the previous tutorial:

```nix
# icat.nix
{ lib
, stdenv
, fetchFromGitHub
, imlib2
, xorg
}:

stdenv.mkDerivation {
  pname = "icat";
  version = "0.5";

  src = fetchFromGitHub {
    owner = "atextor";
    repo = "icat";
    rev = "v${version}";
    sha256 = "0wyy2ksxp95vnh71ybj1bbmqd5ggp13x3mk37pzr99ljs9awy8ka";
  };

  buildInputs = [ imlib2 xorg.libX11.dev ];

  installPhase = ''
    runHook preInstall
    mkdir -p $out/bin
    cp icat $out/bin
    runHook postInstall
  '';
}
```

And here is a `default.nix` that makes the derivation in `icat.nix` available to `nix-build`:

```nix
# default.nix
let
  pkgs = import <nixpkgs> { };
in
{
  icat = pkgs.callPackage ./icat.nix { };
}
```

Copy both of `icat.nix` and `default.nix` onto your own machine, and then verify that you can build the derivation:

```console
$ nix-build -A icat
...
/nix/store/g6w508vxwr3df25dnl4k3xvcr4pqxprj-icat
```

The (omitted) output indicates that the package successfully built, and the very last line reports where Nix put the build result.

## Phases and Hooks
At the end of the previous tutorial, you learned that Nix derivations can be decomposed into a sequence of [phases](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#sec-stdenv-phases), each of which controls some aspect of the build process.

You also learned about the existence of [*hooks*](https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/basic-dependencies-and-hooks), shell functions which execute in some of the derivation phases to control the build *environment*.

Finally, you used this new knowledge to update the `installPhase` of the `icat` derivation with the pre- and post-install hooks:

```diff
# icat.nix
...
  installPhase = ''
+   runHook preInstall
    mkdir -p $out/bin
    cp icat $out/bin
+   runHook postInstall
'';
...
```

A number of other hooks are available, and when packaging for `nixpkgs` you should remember to include calls to these hooks in the phases you define, to make it easy for other contributors to [override](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#chap-overrides) parts of your derivations in the future.

## Package Metadata
The Nixpkgs [contribution guidelines](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#part-contributing) require all packages in Nixpkgs to have a `meta` attribute in their derivation, which contains information like a description of the package, the homepage of the project it belongs to, the software license, which platforms the package can be built for, and a list of Nixpkgs maintainers for the package.

Usually, the required metadata can be found in the upstream repository.

For `icat`, add the following `meta` attribute to the attrset passed to `stdenv.mkDerivation` in `icat.nix`:

```nix
# icat.nix
...
  meta = with lib; {
    description = "icat (Image cat) outputs images in 256-color capable terminals.";
    homepage = "https://github.com/atextor/icat";
    license = licenses.bsdOriginal;
    platforms = platforms.unix;
  };
...
```

With no further technical changes necessary, this derivation is now complete.

## Adding to Nixpkgs
You can now clone a local copy of `nixpkgs`, and move your derivation into an appropriate location within that source tree.

```console
$ git clone https://github.com/nixos/nixpkgs
```

`icat` is a console tool which also displays graphics, so there are a few places within Nixpkgs that you could reasonably move it.

There are currently two other similar tools already in `nixpkgs`, both of which are stored in `pkgs/applications/graphics`, so this is a good candidate for a home for `icat` too.

```console
$ mkdir nixpkgs/pkgs/applications/graphics/icat
```

You should rename `icat.nix` when you copy it to its new home, to keep to the convention of package derivation files being named `default.nix`:

```console
$ mv icat.nix nixpkgs/pkgs/applications/graphics/icat/default.nix
```

The relative directory paths to all packages get referenced in `pkgs/top-level/all-packages.nix`, which you should update now, putting the new package next to the other similar tools:

```diff
# all-packages.nix
...
+ icat = callPackage ../applications/graphics/icat { };

  imgcat = callPackage ../applications/graphics/imgcat { };

  img-cat = callPackage ../applications/graphics/img-cat { };
...
```

:::{note}
Attributes in `all-packages.nix` are arranged *approximately* in alphabetical order, either by attribute name or by the directory containing their corresponding `default.nix`.
:::

## One Final Test
To confirm that the package builds within its new context, you should change directories to the root of the Nixpkgs repo and run `nix-build -A icat` a final time:

```console
$ cd nixpkgs
$ nix-build -A icat
this derivation will be built:
  /nix/store/kf7na78dhwhfrgxjaj27gjkqs4b3n7wz-icat.drv
...
/nix/store/vr2vk8z8839l5j6gra0qlyxrh5sarmh4-icat
```

The build completed as expected, and produced a `result` in the current directory.

The package is now ready for submission to Nixpkgs!

## Next Steps
With the package building successfully, you're almost ready to contribute your work to Nixpkgs.

Be sure to read the [contributing documentation](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md) to understand the current submission conventions before proceeding.

:::{note}
Before contributing your first package, you *must* add your information to [`nixpkgs/maintainers/maintainers-list.nix`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/maintainers/maintainer-list.nix), following the instructions [here](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#var-meta-maintainers).
:::

When you contribute a package, you will also need to add yourself to the list of maintainers for that package, using the name you set in `maintainer-list.nix`:

```diff
# icat.nix
...
  meta = with lib; {
    ...
+   maintainers = [ maintainers.<your_name> ];
    ...
  };
...
```

Commit message:

Use the two-letter prefix hierarchy instead of the category hierarchy
To address: https://github.com/NixOS/nix.dev/pull/696/files#r1322269902

source/tutorials/packaging/contributing-to-nixpkgs.md, after:

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    "description lang=en": "Contributing to Nixpkgs"
    "keywords": "Nix, Nixpkgs, contributing"
---


(contributing-to-nixpkgs)=

# Contributing to Nixpkgs

[Nixpkgs](https://github.com/nixos/nixpkgs) is one of the largest public repositories by contributions and *the* largest single collection of software packages available on the web.

In this tutorial, which follows {ref}`the tutorial on packaging existing software <packaging-existing-software>`, you will learn how to prepare newly-packaged software for submission to Nixpkgs, becoming a Nixpkgs contributor in the process.

## Tags, Revisions, and Releases
An earlier version of the `icat.nix` definition created in the {ref}`Packaging Existing Software <packaging-existing-software>` tutorial used the `master` revision of the [upstream `icat` repository](https://github.com/atextor/icat), which would be suitable for individual use but isn't good practice for submission to Nixpkgs.

It is much better to use a fixed revision corresponding to a particular release version of the software so maintainers (perhaps you!) can easily check whether the package should be updated.

This was already done in the previous tutorial, but as a reminder, here are the steps:
1. Check the upstream repository for tags or releases. On GitHub, these are available at `https://github.com/<owner>/<repo>/tags` and `https://github.com/<owner>/<repo>/releases` respectively.
2. Choose the latest tag or release and write it into a string literal as the value of the `rev` attribute passed to the [fetcher](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#chap-pkgs-fetchers).
3. Use `nix-prefetch-url` or a similar tool to fetch, unpack, and hash the files marked by the tag or release you selected.
4. Alternatively, you can also use a tool such as `nix-init` to automatically generate a required derivation for some common project types, or use its output to help lay down a skeleton implementation of the above steps.

In the `icat` example, the source was hosted on GitHub, so `fetchFromGitHub` was used for the `src` attribute passed to `stdenv.mkDerivation`, with `rev = "v0.5"` corresponding to the latest tag, and a SHA256 hash generated by

```console
nix-prefetch-url --unpack https://github.com/atextor/icat/archive/refs/tags/v0.5.tar.gz --type sha256`
```

Here is the final version of `icat.nix` from the previous tutorial:

```nix
# icat.nix
{ lib
, stdenv
, fetchFromGitHub
, imlib2
, xorg
}:

stdenv.mkDerivation {
  pname = "icat";
  version = "0.5";

  src = fetchFromGitHub {
    owner = "atextor";
    repo = "icat";
    rev = "v${version}";
    sha256 = "0wyy2ksxp95vnh71ybj1bbmqd5ggp13x3mk37pzr99ljs9awy8ka";
  };

  buildInputs = [ imlib2 xorg.libX11.dev ];

  installPhase = ''
    runHook preInstall
    mkdir -p $out/bin
    cp icat $out/bin
    runHook postInstall
  '';
}
```

And here is a `default.nix` that makes the derivation in `icat.nix` available to `nix-build`:

```nix
# default.nix
let
  pkgs = import <nixpkgs> { };
in
{
  icat = pkgs.callPackage ./icat.nix { };
}
```

Copy both of `icat.nix` and `default.nix` onto your own machine, and then verify that you can build the derivation:

```console
$ nix-build -A icat
...
/nix/store/g6w508vxwr3df25dnl4k3xvcr4pqxprj-icat
```

The (omitted) output indicates that the package successfully built, and the very last line reports where Nix put the build result.

## Phases and Hooks
At the end of the previous tutorial, you learned that Nix derivations can be decomposed into a sequence of [phases](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#sec-stdenv-phases), each of which controls some aspect of the build process.

You also learned about the existence of [*hooks*](https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/basic-dependencies-and-hooks), shell functions which execute in some of the derivation phases to control the build *environment*.

Finally, you used this new knowledge to update the `installPhase` of the `icat` derivation with the pre- and post-install hooks:

```diff
# icat.nix
...
  installPhase = ''
+   runHook preInstall
    mkdir -p $out/bin
    cp icat $out/bin
+   runHook postInstall
'';
...
```

A number of other hooks are available, and when packaging for `nixpkgs` you should remember to include calls to these hooks in the phases you define, to make it easy for other contributors to [override](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#chap-overrides) parts of your derivations in the future.

## Package Metadata
The Nixpkgs [contribution guidelines](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#part-contributing) require all packages in Nixpkgs to have a `meta` attribute in their derivation, which contains information like a description of the package, the homepage of the project it belongs to, the software license, which platforms the package can be built for, and a list of Nixpkgs maintainers for the package.

Usually, the required metadata can be found in the upstream repository.

For `icat`, add the following `meta` attribute to the attrset passed to `stdenv.mkDerivation` in `icat.nix`:

```nix
# icat.nix
...
  meta = with lib; {
    description = "icat (Image cat) outputs images in 256-color capable terminals.";
    homepage = "https://github.com/atextor/icat";
    license = licenses.bsdOriginal;
    platforms = platforms.unix;
  };
...
```

With no further technical changes necessary, this derivation is now complete.

## Adding to Nixpkgs
You can now clone a local copy of `nixpkgs`, and move your derivation into an appropriate location within that source tree.

```console
$ git clone https://github.com/nixos/nixpkgs
```

`icat` is a console tool which also displays graphics, so there are a few places within Nixpkgs that you could reasonably move it.

In the past, packages were contributed based on the category they might fit in. For example: there are currently two other similar tools already in `nixpkgs`, both of which are stored in `pkgs/applications/graphics`, so that might have been a good home for `icat` too. However, [`nixpkgs` now prefers organization of packages by the the two-letter prefix of their package name](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/tree/master/pkgs/by-name#readme) within the `pkgs/by-name/` directory, [when possible](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/tree/master/pkgs/by-name#limitations). This eliminates to decide upon a particular category if a package fits into multiple, and it also eliminates the requirement of [updating `all-packages.nix` when using the category-based hierarchy](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/README.md#versioning), and since our case isn't bound by any naming limitations, let's use the two-letter prefix system:

```console
$ mkdir nixpkgs/pkgs/by-name/ic/icat
```

You should rename `icat.nix` when you copy it to its new home, to keep to the convention of package derivation files [being named `package.nix`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/tree/master/pkgs/by-name#example) when using the two-letter prefix system:

```console
$ mv icat.nix nixpkgs/pkgs/applications/graphics/icat/default.nix
```

:::{note}
Other organization systems might specify a different standard name for the derivation root. For example, the [category hierarchy](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/README.md#category-hierarchy) system requires the standard name `default.nix`.

Additionally, as alluded to above, other hierarchy systems might require additional steps. For example, when using the categorical hierarchy, the relative directory paths to all packages get referenced in `pkgs/top-level/all-packages.nix`, which you would also need to update, putting the new package next to the other similar tools:

```diff
# all-packages.nix
...
+ icat = callPackage ../applications/graphics/icat { };

  imgcat = callPackage ../applications/graphics/imgcat { };

  img-cat = callPackage ../applications/graphics/img-cat { };
...
```

:::{note}
Attributes in `all-packages.nix` are arranged *approximately* in alphabetical order, either by attribute name or by the directory containing their corresponding `default.nix`.
:::
:::

## One Final Test
To confirm that the package builds within its new context, you should change directories to the root of the Nixpkgs repo and run `nix-build -A icat` a final time:

```console
$ cd nixpkgs
$ nix-build -A icat
this derivation will be built:
  /nix/store/kf7na78dhwhfrgxjaj27gjkqs4b3n7wz-icat.drv
...
/nix/store/vr2vk8z8839l5j6gra0qlyxrh5sarmh4-icat
```

The build completed as expected, and produced a `result` in the current directory.

The package is now ready for submission to Nixpkgs!

## Next Steps
With the package building successfully, you're almost ready to contribute your work to Nixpkgs.

Be sure to read the [contributing documentation](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md) to understand the current submission conventions before proceeding.

:::{note}
Before contributing your first package, you *must* add your information to [`nixpkgs/maintainers/maintainers-list.nix`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/maintainers/maintainer-list.nix), following the instructions [here](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#var-meta-maintainers).
:::

When you contribute a package, you will also need to add yourself to the list of maintainers for that package, using the name you set in `maintainer-list.nix`:

```diff
# icat.nix
...
  meta = with lib; {
    ...
+   maintainers = [ maintainers.<your_name> ];
    ...
  };
...
```
