source/tutorials/nixos/binary-cache-setup.md, before:

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    "description lang=en": "Setting up a binary cache for store objects"
    "keywords": "Nix, caching"
---

(setup-http-binary-cache)=
# Setting up an HTTP binary cache

A binary cache stores pre-built [Nix store objects](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/latest/store/store-object) and provides them to other machines over the network.
Any machine with a Nix store can be a binary cache for other machines.

## Introduction

In this tutorial you will set up a Nix binary cache that will serve store objects from a NixOS machine over HTTP or HTTPS.

### What will you learn?

You'll learn how to:
- Set up signing keys for your cache
- Enable the right services on the NixOS machine serving the cache
- Check that the setup works as intended

### What do you need?

- A working [Nix installation](<install-nix>) on your local machine

- SSH access to a NixOS machine to use as a cache

  If you're new to NixOS, learn about the [module system](module-system-tutorial) and configure your first system with [](nixos-vms).

- (optional) A public IP and DNS domain

  If you don't host yourself, check [NixOS friendly hosters](https://wiki.nixos.org/wiki/NixOS_friendly_hosters) on the NixOS Wiki.
  Follow the tutorial on [](provisioning-remote-machines-tutorial) to deploy your NixOS configuration.

For a cache on a local network, we assume:
- The hostname is `cache` (replace it with yours, or an IP address)
- The host serves store objects via HTTP on port 80 (this is the default)

For a publicly accessible cache, we assume:
- The domain name is `cache.example.com` (replace it with yours)
- The host serves store objects via HTTPS on port 443 (this is the default)

### How long will it take?

- 25 minutes

## Set up services

For the NixOS machine hosting the cache, create a new configuration module in `binary-cache.nix`:

```{code-block} nix
{ config, ... }:

{
  services.nix-serve = {
    enable = true;
    secretKeyFile = "/var/secrets/cache-private-key.pem";
  };

  services.nginx = {
    enable = true;
    recommendedProxySettings = true;
    virtualHosts.cache = {
      locations."/".proxyPass = "http://${config.services.nix-serve.bindAddress}:${toString config.services.nix-serve.port}";
    };
  };

  networking.firewall.allowedTCPPorts = [
    config.services.nginx.defaultHTTPListenPort
  ];
}
```

The options under [`services.nix-serve`] configure the binary cache service.

`nix-serve` doesn't support IPv6 or SSL/HTTPS.
The [`services.nginx`] options are used to set up a proxy, which does support IPv6, to handle requests to the hostname `cache`.

[`services.nix-serve`]: https://search.nixos.org/options?query=services.nix-serve
[`services.nginx`]: https://search.nixos.org/options?query=services.nginx

:::{important}
There is an [optional HTTPS section](https-binary-cache) at the end of this tutorial.
:::

Add the new NixOS module to the existing machine configuration:

```{code-block} nix
{ config, ... }:

{
  imports = [
    ./binary-cache.nix
  ];

  # ...
}
```

From your local machine, deploy the new configuration:

```shell-session
nixos-rebuild switch --no-flake --target-host root@cache
```

:::{note}
The binary cache daemon will report errors because there is no secret key file, yet.
:::

## Generate a signing key pair

A pair of private and public keys is required to ensure that the store objects in the cache are authentic.

<!-- TODO: link to the remote builds tutorial for the case where store objects are signed after building them -->

To generate a key pair for the binary cache, replace the example hostname `cache.example.com` with your hostname:

```shell-session
nix-store --generate-binary-cache-key cache.example.com cache-private-key.pem cache-public-key.pem
```

`cache-private-key.pem` will be used by the binary cache daemon to sign the binaries as they are served.
Copy it to the location configured in `services.nix-serve.secretKeyFile` on the machine hosting the cache:

```shell-session
scp cache-private-key.pem root@cache:/var/secrets/cache-private-key.pem
```

Up until now, the binary cache daemon was in a restart loop due to the missing secret key file.
Check that it now works correctly:

```shell-session
ssh root@cache systemctl status nix-serve.service
```

:::{important}
[](custom-binary-cache) using `cache-public-key.pem` on your local machine.
:::

## Test availability

The following steps check if everything is set up correctly and may help with identifying problems.

### Check general availability

Test if the binary cache, reverse proxy, and firewall rules work as intended by querying the cache:

```shell-session
$ curl http://cache/nix-cache-info
StoreDir: /nix/store
WantMassQuery: 1
Priority: 30
```

### Check store object signing

To test if store objects are signed correctly, inspect the metadata of a sample derivation.
On the binary cache host, build the `hello` package and get the `.narinfo` file from the cache:

```shell-session
$ hash=$(nix-build '<nixpkgs>' -A pkgs.hello | awk -F '/' '{print $4}' | awk -F '-' '{print $1}')
$ curl "http://cache/$hash.narinfo" | grep "Sig: "
...
Sig: cache.example.org:GyBFzocLAeLEFd0hr2noK84VzPUw0ArCNYEnrm1YXakdsC5FkO2Bkj2JH8Xjou+wxeXMjFKa0YP2AML7nBWsAg==
```

Make sure that the output contains this line prefixed with `Sig:` and shows the public key you generated.

(https-binary-cache)=
### Serving the binary cache via HTTPS

If the binary cache is publicly accessible, it is possible to enforce HTTPS with [Let's Encrypt](https://letsencrypt.org/) SSL certificates.
Edit your `binary-cache.nix` like this and make sure to replace the example URL and mail address with yours:

```{code-block} diff
   services.nginx = {
     enable = true;
     recommendedProxySettings = true;
-    virtualHosts.cache = {
+    virtualHosts."cache.example.com" = {
+      enableACME = true;
+      forceSSL = true;
       locations."/".proxyPass = "http://${config.services.nix-serve.bindAddress}:${toString config.services.nix-serve.port}";
     };
   };

+   security.acme = {
+     acceptTerms = true;
+     certs = {
+       "cache.example.com".email = "you@example.com";
+     };
+   };

   networking.firewall.allowedTCPPorts = [
     config.services.nginx.defaultHTTPListenPort
+    config.services.nginx.defaultSSLListenPort
   ];
```

Rebuild the system to deploy these changes:

```shell-session
nixos-rebuild switch --no-flake --target-host root@cache.example.com
```

## Next steps

If your binary cache is already a [remote build machine](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/latest/advanced-topics/distributed-builds), it will serve all store objects in its Nix store.

- [](custom-binary-cache) using the binary cache's hostname and the generated public key
- [](post-build-hooks) to upload store objects to the binary cache
- [](distributed-build-setup-tutorial)

To save storage space, please refer to the following NixOS configuration attributes:

- [`nix.gc`](https://search.nixos.org/options?query=nix.gc): Options for automatic garbage collection
- [`nix.optimise`](https://search.nixos.org/options?query=nix.optimise): Options for periodic Nix store optimisation

## Alternatives

- The [SSH Store](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/latest/store/types/ssh-store), [Experimental SSH Store](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/latest/store/types/experimental-ssh-store), and the [S3 Binary Cache Store](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/latest/store/types/s3-binary-cache-store) can also be used to serve a cache.
  There are many commercial providers for S3-compatible storage, for example:
  - Amazon S3
  - Tigris
  - Cloudflare R2

- [attic](https://github.com/zhaofengli/attic): Nix binary cache server backed by an S3-compatible storage provider

- [Cachix](https://www.cachix.org): Nix binary cache as a service

## References

- [Nix Manual on HTTP Binary Cache Store](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/latest/store/types/http-binary-cache-store)
- [`services.nix-serve` module options][`services.nix-serve`]
- [`services.nginx` module options][`services.nginx`]

Commit message:

add `nix-serve-ng` as an alternative to set up HTTP caches (#1073)

source/tutorials/nixos/binary-cache-setup.md, after:

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    "description lang=en": "Setting up a binary cache for store objects"
    "keywords": "Nix, caching"
---

(setup-http-binary-cache)=
# Setting up an HTTP binary cache

A binary cache stores pre-built [Nix store objects](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/latest/store/store-object) and provides them to other machines over the network.
Any machine with a Nix store can be a binary cache for other machines.

## Introduction

In this tutorial you will set up a Nix binary cache that will serve store objects from a NixOS machine over HTTP or HTTPS.

### What will you learn?

You'll learn how to:
- Set up signing keys for your cache
- Enable the right services on the NixOS machine serving the cache
- Check that the setup works as intended

### What do you need?

- A working [Nix installation](<install-nix>) on your local machine

- SSH access to a NixOS machine to use as a cache

  If you're new to NixOS, learn about the [module system](module-system-tutorial) and configure your first system with [](nixos-vms).

- (optional) A public IP and DNS domain

  If you don't host yourself, check [NixOS friendly hosters](https://wiki.nixos.org/wiki/NixOS_friendly_hosters) on the NixOS Wiki.
  Follow the tutorial on [](provisioning-remote-machines-tutorial) to deploy your NixOS configuration.

For a cache on a local network, we assume:
- The hostname is `cache` (replace it with yours, or an IP address)
- The host serves store objects via HTTP on port 80 (this is the default)

For a publicly accessible cache, we assume:
- The domain name is `cache.example.com` (replace it with yours)
- The host serves store objects via HTTPS on port 443 (this is the default)

### How long will it take?

- 25 minutes

## Set up services

For the NixOS machine hosting the cache, create a new configuration module in `binary-cache.nix`:

```{code-block} nix
{ config, ... }:

{
  services.nix-serve = {
    enable = true;
    secretKeyFile = "/var/secrets/cache-private-key.pem";
  };

  services.nginx = {
    enable = true;
    recommendedProxySettings = true;
    virtualHosts.cache = {
      locations."/".proxyPass = "http://${config.services.nix-serve.bindAddress}:${toString config.services.nix-serve.port}";
    };
  };

  networking.firewall.allowedTCPPorts = [
    config.services.nginx.defaultHTTPListenPort
  ];
}
```

The options under [`services.nix-serve`] configure the binary cache service.

`nix-serve` doesn't support IPv6 or SSL/HTTPS.
The [`services.nginx`] options are used to set up a proxy, which does support IPv6, to handle requests to the hostname `cache`.

[`services.nix-serve`]: https://search.nixos.org/options?query=services.nix-serve
[`services.nginx`]: https://search.nixos.org/options?query=services.nginx

:::{important}
There is an [optional HTTPS section](https-binary-cache) at the end of this tutorial.
:::

Add the new NixOS module to the existing machine configuration:

```{code-block} nix
{ config, ... }:

{
  imports = [
    ./binary-cache.nix
  ];

  # ...
}
```

From your local machine, deploy the new configuration:

```shell-session
nixos-rebuild switch --no-flake --target-host root@cache
```

:::{note}
The binary cache daemon will report errors because there is no secret key file, yet.
:::

## Generate a signing key pair

A pair of private and public keys is required to ensure that the store objects in the cache are authentic.

<!-- TODO: link to the remote builds tutorial for the case where store objects are signed after building them -->

To generate a key pair for the binary cache, replace the example hostname `cache.example.com` with your hostname:

```shell-session
nix-store --generate-binary-cache-key cache.example.com cache-private-key.pem cache-public-key.pem
```

`cache-private-key.pem` will be used by the binary cache daemon to sign the binaries as they are served.
Copy it to the location configured in `services.nix-serve.secretKeyFile` on the machine hosting the cache:

```shell-session
scp cache-private-key.pem root@cache:/var/secrets/cache-private-key.pem
```

Up until now, the binary cache daemon was in a restart loop due to the missing secret key file.
Check that it now works correctly:

```shell-session
ssh root@cache systemctl status nix-serve.service
```

:::{important}
[](custom-binary-cache) using `cache-public-key.pem` on your local machine.
:::

## Test availability

The following steps check if everything is set up correctly and may help with identifying problems.

### Check general availability

Test if the binary cache, reverse proxy, and firewall rules work as intended by querying the cache:

```shell-session
$ curl http://cache/nix-cache-info
StoreDir: /nix/store
WantMassQuery: 1
Priority: 30
```

### Check store object signing

To test if store objects are signed correctly, inspect the metadata of a sample derivation.
On the binary cache host, build the `hello` package and get the `.narinfo` file from the cache:

```shell-session
$ hash=$(nix-build '<nixpkgs>' -A pkgs.hello | awk -F '/' '{print $4}' | awk -F '-' '{print $1}')
$ curl "http://cache/$hash.narinfo" | grep "Sig: "
...
Sig: cache.example.org:GyBFzocLAeLEFd0hr2noK84VzPUw0ArCNYEnrm1YXakdsC5FkO2Bkj2JH8Xjou+wxeXMjFKa0YP2AML7nBWsAg==
```

Make sure that the output contains this line prefixed with `Sig:` and shows the public key you generated.

(https-binary-cache)=
### Serving the binary cache via HTTPS

If the binary cache is publicly accessible, it is possible to enforce HTTPS with [Let's Encrypt](https://letsencrypt.org/) SSL certificates.
Edit your `binary-cache.nix` like this and make sure to replace the example URL and mail address with yours:

```{code-block} diff
   services.nginx = {
     enable = true;
     recommendedProxySettings = true;
-    virtualHosts.cache = {
+    virtualHosts."cache.example.com" = {
+      enableACME = true;
+      forceSSL = true;
       locations."/".proxyPass = "http://${config.services.nix-serve.bindAddress}:${toString config.services.nix-serve.port}";
     };
   };

+   security.acme = {
+     acceptTerms = true;
+     certs = {
+       "cache.example.com".email = "you@example.com";
+     };
+   };

   networking.firewall.allowedTCPPorts = [
     config.services.nginx.defaultHTTPListenPort
+    config.services.nginx.defaultSSLListenPort
   ];
```

Rebuild the system to deploy these changes:

```shell-session
nixos-rebuild switch --no-flake --target-host root@cache.example.com
```

## Next steps

If your binary cache is already a [remote build machine](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/latest/advanced-topics/distributed-builds), it will serve all store objects in its Nix store.

- [](custom-binary-cache) using the binary cache's hostname and the generated public key
- [](post-build-hooks) to upload store objects to the binary cache
- [](distributed-build-setup-tutorial)

To save storage space, please refer to the following NixOS configuration attributes:

- [`nix.gc`](https://search.nixos.org/options?query=nix.gc): Options for automatic garbage collection
- [`nix.optimise`](https://search.nixos.org/options?query=nix.optimise): Options for periodic Nix store optimisation

## Alternatives

- [`nix-serve-ng`](https://github.com/aristanetworks/nix-serve-ng): A drop-in replacement for `nix-serve`, written in Haskell

- The [SSH Store](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/latest/store/types/ssh-store), [Experimental SSH Store](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/latest/store/types/experimental-ssh-store), and the [S3 Binary Cache Store](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/latest/store/types/s3-binary-cache-store) can also be used to serve a cache.
  There are many commercial providers for S3-compatible storage, for example:
  - Amazon S3
  - Tigris
  - Cloudflare R2

- [attic](https://github.com/zhaofengli/attic): Nix binary cache server backed by an S3-compatible storage provider

- [Cachix](https://www.cachix.org): Nix binary cache as a service

## References

- [Nix Manual on HTTP Binary Cache Store](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/latest/store/types/http-binary-cache-store)
- [`services.nix-serve` module options][`services.nix-serve`]
- [`services.nginx` module options][`services.nginx`]
