source/install-nix.md, before:

(install-nix)=

# Install Nix

:::::{tab-set}

::::{tab-item} Linux

Install Nix via the recommended [multi-user installation]:

```shell-session
$ curl -L https://nixos.org/nix/install | sh -s -- --daemon
```

On Arch Linux, you can alternatively [install Nix through `pacman`](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Nix#Installation).

::::

::::{tab-item} macOS

Install Nix via the recommended [multi-user installation]:

```shell-session
$ curl -L https://nixos.org/nix/install | sh
```

:::{important}
**Updating to macOS 15 Sequoia**

If you recently updated to macOS 15 Sequoia and are getting
```console
error: the user '_nixbld1' in the group 'nixbld' does not exist
```
when running Nix commands, refer to GitHub issue [NixOS/nix#10892](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/issues/10892) for instructions to fix your installation without reinstalling.
:::

::::

::::{tab-item} Windows (WSL2)

Install Nix via the recommended [single-user installation]:

```shell-session
$ curl -L https://nixos.org/nix/install | sh -s -- --no-daemon
```

However, if you have [systemd support] enabled, install Nix via the recommended [multi-user installation]:

```shell-session
$ curl -L https://nixos.org/nix/install | sh -s -- --daemon
```

[systemd support]: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/wsl-config#systemd-support

::::

::::{tab-item} Docker

Start a Docker shell with Nix:

```shell-session
$ docker run -it nixos/nix
```

Or start a Docker shell with Nix exposing a `workdir` directory:

```shell-session
$ mkdir workdir
$ docker run -it -v $(pwd)/workdir:/workdir nixos/nix
```

The `workdir` example from above can be also used to start hacking on Nixpkgs:

```shell-session
$ git clone git@github.com:NixOS/nixpkgs
$ docker run -it -v $(pwd)/nixpkgs:/nixpkgs nixos/nix
bash-5.1# nix-build -I nixpkgs=/nixpkgs -A hello
bash-5.1# find ./result # this symlink points to the build package
```

::::

:::::

## Verify installation

Check the installation by opening **a new terminal** and typing:

```shell-session
$ nix --version
nix (Nix) 2.11.0
```

[multi-user installation]: https://nix.dev/manual/nix/stable/installation/multi-user.html
[single-user installation]: https://nix.dev/manual/nix/stable/installation/single-user.html

Commit message:

Add note about xz requirement for tarball in install-nix.md (#1119)
Since we're providing for download `.tar.xz` binary tarballs, we assume that systems have xz-utils or similar for handling that compression format.  We should make a note of this small requirement at the beginning of the Install Nix page.

Ref for WSL :
```
PS C:\Users\thadg> wsl
thad@MarsOrBust:/mnt/c/Users/thadg$ curl -L https://nixos.org/nix/install | sh -s -- --daemon
  % Total    % Received % Xferd  Average Speed   Time    Time     Time  Current
                                 Dload  Upload   Total   Spent    Left  Speed
  0     0    0     0    0     0      0      0 --:--:--  0:00:03 --:--:--     0
100  4267  100  4267    0     0    880      0  0:00:04  0:00:04 --:--:--  5216
sh: you do not have 'xz' installed, which I need to unpack the binary tarball
```

Fixed after running `sudo apt install xz-utils` for my Debian distribution with WSL

source/install-nix.md, after:

(install-nix)=

# Install Nix
Requirements:
 - Prior to installation, you might need to first install `xz-utils` or similar for uncompressing the Nix binary tarball (`.tar.xz`) that will be downloaded via the scripts below.

:::::{tab-set}

::::{tab-item} Linux

Install Nix via the recommended [multi-user installation]:

```shell-session
$ curl -L https://nixos.org/nix/install | sh -s -- --daemon
```

On Arch Linux, you can alternatively [install Nix through `pacman`](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Nix#Installation).

::::

::::{tab-item} macOS

Install Nix via the recommended [multi-user installation]:

```shell-session
$ curl -L https://nixos.org/nix/install | sh
```

:::{important}
**Updating to macOS 15 Sequoia**

If you recently updated to macOS 15 Sequoia and are getting
```console
error: the user '_nixbld1' in the group 'nixbld' does not exist
```
when running Nix commands, refer to GitHub issue [NixOS/nix#10892](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/issues/10892) for instructions to fix your installation without reinstalling.
:::

::::

::::{tab-item} Windows (WSL2)

Install Nix via the recommended [single-user installation]:

```shell-session
$ curl -L https://nixos.org/nix/install | sh -s -- --no-daemon
```

However, if you have [systemd support] enabled, install Nix via the recommended [multi-user installation]:

```shell-session
$ curl -L https://nixos.org/nix/install | sh -s -- --daemon
```

[systemd support]: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/wsl-config#systemd-support

::::

::::{tab-item} Docker

Start a Docker shell with Nix:

```shell-session
$ docker run -it nixos/nix
```

Or start a Docker shell with Nix exposing a `workdir` directory:

```shell-session
$ mkdir workdir
$ docker run -it -v $(pwd)/workdir:/workdir nixos/nix
```

The `workdir` example from above can be also used to start hacking on Nixpkgs:

```shell-session
$ git clone git@github.com:NixOS/nixpkgs
$ docker run -it -v $(pwd)/nixpkgs:/nixpkgs nixos/nix
bash-5.1# nix-build -I nixpkgs=/nixpkgs -A hello
bash-5.1# find ./result # this symlink points to the build package
```

::::

:::::

## Verify installation

Check the installation by opening **a new terminal** and typing:

```shell-session
$ nix --version
nix (Nix) 2.11.0
```

[multi-user installation]: https://nix.dev/manual/nix/stable/installation/multi-user.html
[single-user installation]: https://nix.dev/manual/nix/stable/installation/single-user.html
