source/recommended-reading.md, before:

# Recommended reading

## Nix language tutorials

- [Nix language one-pager reference](https://github.com/tazjin/nix-1p) (Vincent Ambo, 2019-2021)

  Overview of common language features and widely used idioms.

- [A tour of Nix](https://nixcloud.io/tour) (Joachim Schiele, 2015-2022)

  Interactive exercises with the Nix language.

- [Video: Nix language overview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eCapIx9heBw&list=PL-saUBvIJzOkjAw_vOac75v-x6EzNzZq-&index=5) (Wil Taylor, 2021)

  Overview of language features.

- [Video: Reading the Nix language](https://youtu.be/hbJkMl631FE?t=1533) (Jonas Chevalier, 2019)

  Introduction to reading Nix language code.

- [Video: How and Why it Works](https://youtu.be/hbJkMl631FE?t=4806) (Graham Christensen, 2019)

  Introduction to writing derivations.

## Other Articles

- [Customizing packages in Nix](https://bobvanderlinden.me/customizing-packages-in-nix/) (2022)

  An overview of different methods to customize Nix packages.

- [Manage your dot files with Home Manager](https://ghedam.at/24353/tutorial-getting-started-with-home-manager-for-nix) (Mattia Gheda, 2021)

- [Nix Pills](https://nixos.org/nixos/nix-pills/index.html)

  A low-level tutorial on building software packages with Nix, showing in detail how Nixpkgs is constructed.

- [Nix Shorts](https://github.com/justinwoo/nix-shorts)

  A series of posts on basics of how packaging with Nix works.

- [awesome-nix](https://nix-community.github.io/awesome-nix/)

  A collection of Nix resources.

## Other videos

- [Nix Fundamentals](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m4sv2M9jRLg) (Jakub Grzegorz Sokolowski, 2020)
- [Nix Shell Overview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SGekN4pDExY) (Wil Taylor, 2021)
- [How to update a package](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D_IZ2EfW_8U) (Jon Ringer, 2020)
- [How to create a patch for any package](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5K_2RSjbdXc) (Jon Ringer, 2020)
- [Overlays](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dGAL3gMXvug) (Jon Ringer, 2020)
- [Adding a module to NixOS](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bkDYmvKINm8) (Jon Ringer, 2022)
- [Upgrade kernel](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zi_vbddNXtg) (Jon Ringer, 2020)

Commit message:

This cute world NixOS and Flakes unofficial book (#781)
* added this cute world unofficial book

Co-authored-by: Valentin Gagarin <valentin.gagarin@tweag.io>

source/recommended-reading.md, after:

# Recommended reading

## Nix language tutorials

- [Nix language one-pager reference](https://github.com/tazjin/nix-1p) (Vincent Ambo, 2019-2021)

  Overview of common language features and widely used idioms.

- [A tour of Nix](https://nixcloud.io/tour) (Joachim Schiele, 2015-2022)

  Interactive exercises with the Nix language.

- [Video: Nix language overview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eCapIx9heBw&list=PL-saUBvIJzOkjAw_vOac75v-x6EzNzZq-&index=5) (Wil Taylor, 2021)

  Overview of language features.

- [Video: Reading the Nix language](https://youtu.be/hbJkMl631FE?t=1533) (Jonas Chevalier, 2019)

  Introduction to reading Nix language code.

- [Video: How and Why it Works](https://youtu.be/hbJkMl631FE?t=4806) (Graham Christensen, 2019)

  Introduction to writing derivations.

## Other Articles

- [NixOS and Flakes - An unofficial book for beginners](https://nixos-and-flakes.thiscute.world) (2023)

  This tutorial is an introduction to {term}`NixOS` using the experimental Nix [Flakes](flakes) functionality.

- [Customizing packages in Nix](https://bobvanderlinden.me/customizing-packages-in-nix/) (2022)

  An overview of different methods to customize Nix packages.

- [Manage your dot files with Home Manager](https://ghedam.at/24353/tutorial-getting-started-with-home-manager-for-nix) (Mattia Gheda, 2021)

- [Nix Pills](https://nixos.org/nixos/nix-pills/index.html)

  A low-level tutorial on building software packages with Nix, showing in detail how Nixpkgs is constructed.

- [Nix Shorts](https://github.com/justinwoo/nix-shorts)

  A series of posts on basics of how packaging with Nix works.

- [awesome-nix](https://nix-community.github.io/awesome-nix/)

  A collection of Nix resources.

## Other videos

- [Nix Fundamentals](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m4sv2M9jRLg) (Jakub Grzegorz Sokolowski, 2020)
- [Nix Shell Overview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SGekN4pDExY) (Wil Taylor, 2021)
- [How to update a package](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D_IZ2EfW_8U) (Jon Ringer, 2020)
- [How to create a patch for any package](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5K_2RSjbdXc) (Jon Ringer, 2020)
- [Overlays](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dGAL3gMXvug) (Jon Ringer, 2020)
- [Adding a module to NixOS](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bkDYmvKINm8) (Jon Ringer, 2022)
- [Upgrade kernel](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zi_vbddNXtg) (Jon Ringer, 2020)
